Add docs for agent TLS authentication (#1783)
sensu/sensu-docs: content/sensu-go/5.14/guides/clustering.md

---
title: "How to run a Sensu cluster"
linkTitle: "Running a Sensu Cluster"

> description: "Clustering is important to make Sensu more highly available, reliable, and durable. It can help you cope with the loss of a backend node, prevent data loss, and distribute the network load of agents. Read the guide to configure a Sensu cluster."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Clustering makes Sensu more available, reliable, and durable. It can help you cope with the loss of a backend node, prevent data loss, and distribute the network load of agents. Read the guide to configure a Sensu cluster."
```

weight: 120

> version: "5.13"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
version: "5.14"
```

product: "Sensu Go"
platformContent: false
menu: 

>   sensu-go-5.13:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  sensu-go-5.14:
```

    parent: guides
---

- [What is a Sensu cluster?](#what-is-a-sensu-cluster)
- [Why use clustering?](#why-use-clustering)

> - [Configuring a cluster](#configuring-a-cluster)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Configure a cluster](#configure-a-cluster)
```

> - [Adding sensu agents to the cluster](#adding-sensu-agents-to-the-cluster)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Add sensu agents to the cluster](#add-sensu-agents-to-the-cluster)
```

- [Cluster health](#cluster-health)

> - [Managing cluster members](#add-a-cluster-member)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Manage cluster members](#manage-cluster-members)
```

- [Security](#security)
  - [Client-to-server transport security with HTTPS](#client-to-server-with-https)
  - [Client-to-server authentication with HTTPS client certificates](#client-to-server-auth-with-https)
  - [Peer communication authentication with HTTPS client certificates](#peer-auth-https)
  - [Sensu agent with HTTPS](#sensu-agent-https)

> - [Using an external etcd cluster](#using-an-external-etcd-cluster)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Use an external etcd cluster](#use-an-external-etcd-cluster)
```

- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

## What is a Sensu cluster?

A Sensu cluster is a group of [at least three][1] sensu-backend nodes, each connected to a shared etcd cluster, using Sensu's embedded etcd or an external etcd cluster. Creating a Sensu cluster ultimately configures an [etcd cluster][2].

## Why use clustering?

> Clustering is important to make Sensu more highly available, reliable, and durable. It will help you cope with the loss of a backend node, prevent data loss, and distribute the network load of agents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clustering makes Sensu more highly available, reliable, and durable. It will help you cope with the loss of a backend node, prevent data loss, and distribute the network load of agents.
```

_NOTE: We recommend using a load balancer to evenly distribute agent connections across the cluster._

> ## Configuring a cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configure a cluster
```

> The sensu-backend arguments for its store mirror the [etcd configuration flags][3], however the Sensu flags are prefixed with `etcd`. For more detailed descriptions of the different arguments, you can refer to the [etcd docs][4] or the Sensu [backend reference][15].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sensu-backend arguments for its store mirror the [etcd configuration flags][3], but the Sensu flags are prefixed with `etcd`. For detailed descriptions of the different arguments, see the [etcd docs][4] or the Sensu [backend reference][15].
```

> You can configure a Sensu cluster in a couple different ways (we'll show you a few below) but it's recommended to adhere to some etcd cluster guidelines as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure a Sensu cluster in a couple different ways--and we'll show you a few ways below--but we recommend that you adhere to some etcd cluster guidelines as well.
```

> > The recommended etcd cluster size is 3, 5 or 7, which is decided by the fault tolerance requirement. A 7-member cluster can provide enough fault tolerance in most cases. While a larger cluster provides better fault tolerance, the write performance reduces since data needs to be replicated to more machines. It is recommended to have an odd number of members in a cluster. Having an odd cluster size doesn't change the number needed for majority, but you gain a higher tolerance for failure by adding the extra member *(Core OS).*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The recommended etcd cluster size is 3, 5, or 7 members, and the size is decided by the fault tolerance requirement. A 7-member cluster can provide sufficient fault tolerance in most cases. A larger cluster provides better fault tolerance, but reduces the write performance because data needs to be replicated to more machines. We recommend an odd number of members in a cluster. An odd cluster size doesn't change the number needed for majority, but you gain a higher tolerance for failure by adding the extra member *(Core OS)*.
```

We also recommend using stable platforms to support your etcd instances (see [etcd's supported platforms][5]).

### Docker

> If you'd prefer to stand up your Sensu cluster within Docker containers, check out the Sensu Go [docker configuration][7]. This configuration defines three sensu-backend containers and three sensu-agent containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you prefer to stand up your Sensu cluster within Docker containers, check out the Sensu Go [docker configuration][7]. This configuration defines three sensu-backend containers and three sensu-agent containers.
```

### Traditional computer instance

> _NOTE: The remainder of this guide uses on disk configuration. If you are using an ephemeral computer instance, you can use `sensu-backend start --help` to see examples of etcd command line flags. The configuration file entries below translate to `sensu-backend` flags._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_NOTE: The remainder of this guide uses on-disk configuration examples. If you are using an ephemeral computer instance, you can use `sensu-backend start --help` to see examples of etcd command line flags. The configuration file entries below translate to `sensu-backend` flags._
```

#### Sensu backend configuration

> Below are example configuration snippets from `/etc/sensu/backend.yml` using a three node cluster. The nodes are named `backend-1`, `backend-2` and `backend-3` with IP addresses `10.0.0.1`, `10.0.0.2` and `10.0.0.3`, respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below are example configuration snippets from `/etc/sensu/backend.yml` using a three-node cluster. The nodes are named `backend-1`, `backend-2`, and `backend-3` with IP addresses `10.0.0.1`, `10.0.0.2`, and `10.0.0.3`, respectively.
```

**backend-2**

{{< highlight yml >}}
##
# store configuration for backend-2/10.0.0.2
##
etcd-advertise-client-urls: "http://10.0.0.2:2379"
etcd-listen-client-urls: "http://10.0.0.2:2379"
etcd-listen-peer-urls: "http://0.0.0.0:2380"
etcd-initial-cluster: "backend-1=http://10.0.0.1:2380,backend-2=http://10.0.0.2:2380,backend-3=http://10.0.0.3:2380"
etcd-initial-advertise-peer-urls: "http://10.0.0.2:2380"
etcd-initial-cluster-state: "new"
etcd-initial-cluster-token: ""
etcd-name: "backend-2"
{{< /highlight >}}

**backend-3**

{{< highlight yml >}}
##
# store configuration for backend-3/10.0.0.3
##
etcd-advertise-client-urls: "http://10.0.0.3:2379"
etcd-listen-client-urls: "http://10.0.0.3:2379"
etcd-listen-peer-urls: "http://0.0.0.0:2380"
etcd-initial-cluster: "backend-1=http://10.0.0.1:2380,backend-2=http://10.0.0.2:2380,backend-3=http://10.0.0.3:2380"
etcd-initial-advertise-peer-urls: "http://10.0.0.3:2380"
etcd-initial-cluster-state: "new"
etcd-initial-cluster-token: ""
etcd-name: "backend-3"
{{< /highlight >}}

Once each node has the configuration described above, start each sensu-backend:

{{< highlight shell >}}
sudo systemctl start sensu-backend
{{< /highlight >}}

> #### Adding sensu agents to the cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Add Sensu agents to the cluster
```

> Each Sensu agent should have the following entries in `/etc/sensu/agent.yml` to ensure they are aware of all cluster members. This allows the agent to reconnect to a working backend in the scenrio where the one it is currently connected to goes into an unhealthy state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each Sensu agent should have the following entries in `/etc/sensu/agent.yml` to ensure they are aware of all cluster members. This allows the agent to reconnect to a working backend if the cluster member it is currently connected to goes into an unhealthy state.
```

Reviewer: Please confirm that "cluster member" is what you meant by "one" in the second sentence here.

{{< highlight yml >}}
##
# backend-url configuration for all agents connecting to cluster over ws
##

backend-url:
  - "ws://10.0.0.1:8081"
  - "ws://10.0.0.2:8081"
  - "ws://10.0.0.3:8081"
{{< /highlight >}}

You should now have a highly available Sensu cluster! You can verify its health and try other cluster management commands using [sensuctl][6].

## Sensuctl

> [Sensuctl][14] has several commands to help you manage and monitor your cluster. See `sensuctl cluster -h` for additional help usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Sensuctl][14] has several commands to help you manage and monitor your cluster. Run `sensuctl cluster -h` for additional help information.
```

### Cluster health

Get cluster health status and etcd alarm information.

{{< highlight shell >}}
sensuctl cluster health

       ID            Name                          Error                           Healthy  
────────────────── ─────────── ─────────────────────────────────────────────────── ─────────
a32e8f613b529ad4   backend-1                                                        true
c3d9f4b8d0dd1ac9   backend-2  dial tcp 10.0.0.2:2379: connect: connection refused   false
c8f63ae435a5e6bf   backend-3                                                        true
{{< /highlight >}}

> ### Add a cluster member

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Manage cluster members
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Add a cluster member
```

Add a new member node to an existing cluster.

{{< highlight shell >}}
sensuctl cluster member-add backend-4 https://10.0.0.4:2380

added member 2f7ae42c315f8c2d to cluster

ETCD_NAME="backend-4"
ETCD_INITIAL_CLUSTER="backend-4=https://10.0.0.4:2380,backend-1=https://10.0.0.1:2380,backend-2=https://10.0.0.2:2380,backend-3=https://10.0.0.3:2380"
ETCD_INITIAL_CLUSTER_STATE="existing"
{{< /highlight >}}

> ### List cluster members

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### List cluster members
```

> List the ID, name, peer urls, and client urls of all nodes in a cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
List the ID, name, peer URLs, and client URLs of all nodes in a cluster.
```

{{< highlight shell >}}
sensuctl cluster member-list

       ID            Name             Peer URLs                Client URLs
────────────────── ─────────── ───────────────────────── ─────────────────────────
a32e8f613b529ad4   backend-1    https://10.0.0.1:2380     https://10.0.0.1:2379  
c3d9f4b8d0dd1ac9   backend-2    https://10.0.0.2:2380     https://10.0.0.2:2379
c8f63ae435a5e6bf   backend-3    https://10.0.0.3:2380     https://10.0.0.3:2379
2f7ae42c315f8c2d   backend-4    https://10.0.0.4:2380     https://10.0.0.4:2379
{{< /highlight >}}

> ### Remove a cluster member

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Remove a cluster member
```

Remove a faulty or decommissioned member node from a cluster.

{{< highlight shell >}}
sensuctl cluster member-remove 2f7ae42c315f8c2d

Removed member 2f7ae42c315f8c2d from cluster
{{< /highlight >}}

> ### Update a cluster member

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Update a cluster member
```

Update the peer URLs of a member in a cluster.

{{< highlight shell >}}
sensuctl cluster member-update c8f63ae435a5e6bf https://10.0.0.4:2380

Updated member with ID c8f63ae435a5e6bf in cluster
{{< /highlight >}}

## Security

Please see our guide, [Securing Sensu][16], for more information.

> ## Using an external etcd cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Use an external etcd cluster
```

> Using Sensu with an external etcd cluster requires etcd 3.3.2 or newer. To stand up an external etcd cluster, you can follow etcd's [clustering guide][12] using the same store configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using Sensu with an external etcd cluster requires etcd 3.3.2 or newer. To stand up an external etcd cluster, follow etcd's [clustering guide][12] using the same store configuration.
```

> In this example, we will enable client-to-server and peer communication authentication [using self-signed TLS certificates][13]. Below is how you would start etcd for `backend-1` from our three node configuration example above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we will enable client-to-server and peer communication authentication [using self-signed TLS certificates][13]. Here's how to start etcd for `backend-1` from our three-node configuration example above:
```

{{< highlight shell >}}
etcd \
--listen-client-urls "https://10.0.0.1:2379" \
--advertise-client-urls "https://10.0.0.1:2379" \
--listen-peer-urls "https://10.0.0.1:2380" \
--initial-cluster "backend-1=https://10.0.0.1:2380,backend-2=https://10.0.0.2:2380,backend-3=https://10.0.0.3:2380" \
--initial-advertise-peer-urls "https://10.0.0.1:2380" \
--initial-cluster-state "new" \
--name "backend-1" \
--trusted-ca-file=./ca.pem \
--cert-file=./backend-1.pem \
--key-file=./backend-1-key.pem \
--client-cert-auth \
--peer-trusted-ca-file=./ca.pem \
--peer-cert-file=./backend-1.pem \
--peer-key-file=./backend-1-key.pem \
--peer-client-cert-auth \
--auto-compaction-mode revision \
--auto-compaction-retention 2
{{< /highlight >}}

> _NOTE: The `auto-compaction-mode` and `auto-compaction-retention` flags are of particular significance. Without these settings your database may quickly reach etcd's maximum database size limit._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_NOTE: The `auto-compaction-mode` and `auto-compaction-retention` flags are important. Without these settings your database may quickly reach etcd's maximum database size limit._
```

> In order to inform Sensu that you'd like to use this external etcd data source, add the `sensu-backend` flag `--no-embed-etcd` to the original configuration, along with the path to a client certificate created using our CA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To tell Sensu to use this external etcd data source, add the `sensu-backend` flag `--no-embed-etcd` to the original configuration, along with the path to a client certificate created using our CA.
```

{{< highlight shell >}}
sensu-backend start \
--etcd-trusted-ca-file=./ca.pem \
--etcd-cert-file=./client.pem \
--etcd-key-file=./client-key.pem \
--etcd-advertise-client-urls=https://10.0.0.1:2379,https://10.0.0.2:2379,https://10.0.0.3:2379 \
--no-embed-etcd
{{< /highlight >}}

## Troubleshooting

> ### Failures modes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Failure modes
```

> See [the etcd failure modes documentation][8] for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the [etcd failure modes documentation][8] for more information.
```

### Disaster recovery

> See [the etcd recovery guide][9] for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the [etcd recovery guide][9] for more information.
```
